---
layout: post
categories: [VocabSubs, VocabSubs2, linguistics, NLP, language learning, Japanese]
title: "VocabSubs2: Generating subtitles for language learning using existing Japanese subs"
tldr: "VocabSubs2 uses Japanese subtitles to generate subtitles containing English glosses to help you learn Japanese vocabulary. The method proposed here is generalizable to any language pair."
---
## tl;dr
VocabSubs2 uses Japanese subtitles to generate subtitles containing English glosses to help you learn Japanese. The current subtitles are a little janky, but from my subjective experience I feel that it *does* accomplish its primary goal of helping me learn Japanese vocabulary. The method proposed here is generalizable to any language pair.

## Background
Earlier this year, I made VocabSubs2 after I saw a YouTube video, [Will These SPECIAL SUBS Help You Learn Japanese?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3wF91iArEp0) by Goken. The basic idea is instead of normal subtitles of Japanese translated fully into English, these special subtitles retain the original word order and translate each word to English, like an [interlinear gloss](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interlinear_gloss). As each word is spoken in the audio, the corresponding English translation of *that word only* appears on screen. When the sentence is over, all subtitles are removed and it starts again for the next one.

I was inspired by this and wanted to try automating the creation of these subtitles, making use of the plethora of existing subtitles in Japanese. I've done some Japanese NLP stuff in the past, and in fact, this is a spiritual successor to VocabSubs, which I made back in 2021, which dumped the full dictionary entry for the words in each subtitle on the screen.

### Motivation for the special subtitles
The main advantage it has over normal English subtitles for language learning is that is forces the user to at least comprehend the grammar. If everything is fully translated, there would be no need to understand the structure of Japanese and the viewer does not need to practice their comprehension. The fact that each word appears as they are said also helps reinforce the correspondence between pronunciation and meaning. See the [original video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3wF91iArEp0) for more justification of this approach.

### Changes to the special subtitles
One important change I made to the original format of the special subtitles is I completely omit grammatical particles and non-content morphemes (e.g. ～ました <small-caps>POLITE.PAST</small-caps>) from the final subtitles by design.

This is because I am an intermediate Japanese language learner with a fairly good grasp of grammar, but am absolutely horrible with vocabulary. I find that if particles are omitted from the subtitles, I can force myself to listen carefully to the audio for grammatical cues, giving me listening practice, and increases the effectiveness of associating pronunciation with meaning.

Omitting these words also means the resulting subtitles are cleaner and easier to read, since I avoid subtitles full of particles I already know like "-ga" or "が", or even their glosses like "subject" or "<small-caps>SUBJ</small-caps>".

## The algorithm
There are lots of Japanese subtitles for anime especially, but they are all sentence (or more precisely, [utterance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utterance)) timed. We need to get the timings for each *word,* by splitting up each subtitle into words (tokenization), then matching them up to the audio (forced alignment). We'll also need to define those words, and insert their translations into our new subtitle track based on those timings.

### Tokenization
The splitting of utterances into words (or more precisely, [morphemes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morpheme)) is known as **tokenization**. This involves grammatically analyzing the utterance to determine which segments of the sentence are their own word, and part of speech they belong to. The part of speech will come in useful for providing more accurate translations when we define them later.

This is generally a harder task for Japanese than English, in part because we usually separate English words with spaces, whereas Japanese is generally written without them:

>　今日は小さなスーパーに行くつもりです。(= Today I plan to go to a small supermarket.)

However, if you have a program that understands Japanese grammar, then it is possible to parse individual words. For example:
* Particle morphemes such as は <small-caps>TOPIC</small-caps> are usually preceded by noun phrases like 今日 *today* and 小さなスーパ *small supermarket*.
* 今日 has no function morphemes that indicate the presence of multiple words in the phrase, and noun phrases nearly always have nouns, so 今日 must be a noun.
* 小さなスーパ has a morpheme な, which indicates the end of an adjective, so 小さな must be an adjective and スーパ must be a noun.

By knowing some rules, it's possible to deduce where word boundaries are and their parts of speech, even without knowing their definitions.

To tokenize my subtitles, I used [Fugashi](https://pypi.org/project/fugashi/), which allows me to pass [MeCab (website in Japanese)](https://taku910.github.io/mecab/) a Japanese sentence and receive not only the list of words and their parts of speech, but also their **lemma**, which is the most basic form of the word that we'll need to look up in dictionary.

### Defining words
Once we have the lemma of each word from the tokenization phase, we can look them up in the dictionary. I use [Jamdict](https://pypi.org/project/jamdict/)