adiugoskr/nouns.md, before:

---
title: Adiugoskr nouns
layout: adiugoskr
---
## Animacy
By default, all of the syllables in an inanimate noun are low tone, and the final syllable in animate nouns is high tone.

* Animate: [**rofá** *'dog'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#dog), [**lowí** *'snake'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#snake), [**pikó** *'child'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#child)
* Inanimate: [**bjan** *'leaf'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#leaf), [**buna** *'belly'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#belly), [**fiun** *'grain'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#grain)

Underlyingly, only the final syllable is specified for tone, with low tone specified for inanimate nouns and high tone specified for animate nouns. In Adiugoskr, any syllables with unspecified tone become low tone when spoken.

## Proximate
Nouns can be marked as physically close or more salient to the discourse context with the proximate marker **-dé**. Due to tone sandhi, inanimate proximate nouns have a rising tone on the penultimate syllable.

## Topicalization
Adiugoskr is a topic-prominent language that allows the discourse topic to be set by putting the topicalized NP at the start (or in some cases, end) of the sentence. If the head noun of the NP is inanimate, then the noun's final syllable will have a rising tone.

<div class="gloss">
  A buna fǐun ajén sa án laur gadabó.<br/>
  a buna fǐun ajén sa án laur gada-bó <br/>
  in belly grain\*TOP* *GNO* *NEG* you be.able count-*2>3* <br/>
  ! 'You cannot count the grain in your belly.'
</div>

The topicalized NP does not necessarily need to be an argument of a verb in the sentence; it may simply be relevant in the discourse context.

<div class="gloss">
  Ajaná pikó yin ikár.<br/>
  Ajaná pikó yin ikár <br/>
  Ajaná\*TOP* child bread hate <br/>
  ! 'As for Ajana, (her) child hates bread.'
</div>

Underlyingly, the topic marking morpheme is simply a high tone, which fuses with the low tone final syllable of inanimate nouns to form the rising tone.

## Possession
A *possessum* noun that is possessed by a *possessor* is marked using the possessum marker **-war**, glossed <small-caps>POSS</small-caps>. The marker agrees with its possessor in animacy: if the possessor is animate, the marker will be high tone **-wár**, and if it is inanimate, the marker will be low tone **-war**. Due to tone sandhi, inanimate possessums will have a rising tone on the penultimate syllable.

Like adjectives, the possessor usually follows the possessum, but both possessum-possessor and possessor-possessum orders are grammatical.

Commit message:

update adiugoskr with relative clauses

adiugoskr/nouns.md, after:

---
title: Adiugoskr nouns
layout: adiugoskr
---
## Animacy
By default, all of the syllables in an inanimate noun are low tone, and the final syllable in animate nouns is high tone.

* Animate: [**rofá** *'dog'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#dog), [**lowí** *'snake'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#snake), [**pikó** *'child'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#child)
* Inanimate: [**bjan** *'leaf'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#leaf), [**buna** *'belly'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#belly), [**fiun** *'grain'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#grain)

Underlyingly, only the final syllable is specified for tone, with low tone specified for inanimate nouns and high tone specified for animate nouns. In Adiugoskr, any syllables with unspecified tone become low tone when spoken.

## Proximity
Nouns can be marked as physically close or more salient to the discourse context with the proximate marker **-dé**. Due to tone sandhi, inanimate proximate nouns have a rising tone on the penultimate syllable.

## Topicalization
Adiugoskr is a topic-prominent language that allows the discourse topic to be set by putting the topicalized NP at the start (or in some cases, end) of the sentence. If the head noun of the NP is inanimate, then the noun's final syllable will have a rising tone.

<div class="gloss">
  A buna fǐun ajén sa án laur gadabó.<br/>
  a buna fǐun ajén sa án laur gada-bó <br/>
  in belly grain\*TOP* *GNO* *NEG* you be.able count-*2>3* <br/>
  ! 'You cannot count the grain in your belly.'
</div>

The topicalized NP does not necessarily need to be an argument of a verb in the sentence; it may simply be relevant in the discourse context.

<div class="gloss">
  Ajaná pikó yin ikár.<br/>
  Ajaná pikó yin ikár <br/>
  Ajaná\*TOP* child bread hate <br/>
  ! 'As for Ajana, (her) child hates bread.'
</div>

Underlyingly, the topic marking morpheme is simply a high tone, which fuses with the low tone final syllable of inanimate nouns to form the rising tone.

## Possession
A *possessum* noun that is possessed by a *possessor* is marked using the possessum marker **-war**, glossed <small-caps>POSS</small-caps>. The marker agrees with its possessor in animacy: if the possessor is animate, the marker will be high tone **-wár**, and if it is inanimate, the marker will be low tone **-war**. Due to tone sandhi, inanimate possessums will have a rising tone on the penultimate syllable.

Like adjectives, the possessor usually follows the possessum, but both possessum-possessor and possessor-possessum orders are grammatical.

## Relative clauses
[Complementizers](/adiugoskr/complementizers) can be used to introduce a relative clause that modifies a noun phrase. Relative clauses come before the noun phrase that is modifies. Within the relative clause, the modified noun phrase can be either the subject or object of the verb, depending on the [salience hierarcy](/adiugoskr/verbs#morphosyntactic-alignment).

<div class="gloss">
  Vi Ajaná a eljet iujá rofá ezjgeniu asjél<br/>
  vi Ajaná a eljet iu=já rofá ezjgeniu asjél<br/>
  *POS* Ajana in station *PST*=see\*AN* dog bus ride\*AN* <br/>
  ! 'The dog Ajana saw in the station is riding the bus.'
</div>

### Noun evidentiality and polarity
Since the [existential verb](/adiugoskr/verbs#existential-verb) is usually not overt in subordinate clauses, the polarity complementizers **sa** <small-caps>NEG</small-caps> and **vi** <small-caps>POS</small-caps>, as well as the evidentiality complementizers may appear next to a noun without an adjoining verb.

<div class="gloss">
  Du sa njáu iudvén <br/>
  du sa njáu iu=dvén <br/>
  cup *NEG* cat *PST*=push\*AN* <br/>
  ! 'Something that is not a cat pushed the cup.'
</div>
