adiugoskr/verbs.md, before:

---
title: Adiugoskr verbs
layout: adiugoskr
---
## TAM
Adiugoskr verbs have clitics marking tense and mood. These clitics come before verbs or, if the clause contains a serial verb complex, before the verb complex. The mood clitic always comes before the tense clitic.

Aspect is not marked with clitics, but instead with serial verbs.

### Tense
The default, unmarked tense is non-past, and clitic **iu=** marks past tense.

### Mood
In Adiugoskr, the default, unmarked grammatical mood is indicative/realis. There are four clitics marking various irrealis moods:

* **sjǎn=**: Dubitative, indicating that the speaker doubts whether the verb action actually occurred.
* **rró=**: Optative mood, indicating that the verb action is desired or is a command.
* **íz=**: Conditional mood, indicating that the verb action is the premise of some condition, whether real or hypothetical.
* **it=**: Counterfactual mood, indicating that the verb action is hypothetical and did not actually occur.

## Agreement with verbal arguments
### Intransitives and reflexives
Intransitive and reflexive verbs in Adiugoskr have only one argument, the subject. These verbs agree with their subject's animacy in tone: 1st and 2nd person arguments (also called *Speech Act Participants*, or *SAPs*) and animate 3rd person subjects cause the final syllable of the verb to have a high tone, as opposed to a low tone for inanimate subjects.

<div class="gloss">
  Rofá ejoná a eljetwar ezjgeniu iuzagá. <br/>
  rofá ejoná a eljet-war ezjgeniu iu=zagá <br/>
  dog*(AN)* lonely\*AN* in station-*POSS* bus *PST*=sleep\*AN*<br/>
  ! 'The lonely dog slept in the bus station.'
</div>

### Transitives with 3rd person subjects and objects
A transitive verb where both the subject and object are 3rd person nouns will have a high tone final syllable if either argument is animate, or low tone if both are inanimate.

### Transitives
If the two core arguments of a transitive, non-reflexive verb involves an SAP, then the verb exhibits polypersonal agreement with its arguments.

* **-yé**: 1st person **subject** > 2nd person **object**
* **-dé**: 1st person **subject** > 3rd person **object**
* **-bó**: 2nd person **subject** > 3rd person **object**

These can be given a rising tone instead of a high tone to invert the subject-object relationship:

* **-yě**: 1st person **object** < 2nd person **subject**
* **-dě**: 1st person **object** < 3rd person **subject**
* **-bǒ**: 2nd person **object** < 3rd person **subject**

## Morphosyntactic alignment
Adiugoskr is a direct-inverse language that organizes verbal arguments according to a hierarchy. The argument that is higher on this hierarchy is the agent of the verb, and the argument that is lower on this hierarchy is the object. This hierarchy is based on an NP's salience to the discourse context, and SAPs are generally more salient than animate 3rd person arguments, which are more generally more salient than inanimate 3rd person arguments.

Arguments can be made more salient (*promoted*) by marking an overt noun argument with the proximate marker **-dé**, or by topicalizing them. While an SAP that has been promoted outranks other SAPs, a promoted 3rd person argument can never outrank any SAP. Thus, the full hierarchy is as follows:

1. Speech Act Participants (SAPs)
    1. Proximate SAPs
    2. Topicalized SAPs
    3. 1st person arguments
    4. 2nd person arguments
2. 3rd person arguments
    1. Proximate 3rd person arguments
    2. Topicalized 3rd person arguments
    3. Animate 3rd person arguments
    4. Inanimate 3rd person arguments

### Inverted verbs
A rising tone on the final syllable of a verb indicates that it has been inverted, and that the higher-ranking argument is the object and the lower-raking argument is the agent.

### Inherently inverse verbs
Some verbs are inherently inverse, meaning that for those verbs, animate and promoted 3rd person arguments are outrank SAPs, which in turn outrank non-promoted inanimate arguments. Thus, the following hierarchy applies for inherently inverse verbs:

2. 3rd person arguments
    1. Proximate 3rd person arguments
    2. Topicalized 3rd person arguments
    3. Animate 3rd person arguments
1. Speech Act Participants (SAPs)
    1. Proximate SAPs
    2. Topicalized SAPs
    3. 1st person arguments
    4. 2nd person arguments
3. Non-promoted inanimate 3rd person arguments

Most inherently inverse verbs are verbs that are unpleasant or immoral for a person to do, such as [**rrigau** *'murder'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#murder) or [**venba** *'swindle'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#swindle).

Commit message:

update adiugoskr with relative clauses

adiugoskr/verbs.md, after:

---
title: Adiugoskr verbs
layout: adiugoskr
---
## TAM
Adiugoskr verbs have clitics marking tense and mood. These clitics come before verbs or, if the clause contains a serial verb complex, before the verb complex. The mood clitic always comes before the tense clitic.

Aspect is not marked with clitics, but instead with serial verbs.

### Tense
The default, unmarked tense is non-past, and clitic **iu=** marks past tense.

### Mood
In Adiugoskr, the default, unmarked grammatical mood is indicative/realis. There are four clitics marking various irrealis moods:

* **sjǎn=**: Dubitative, indicating that the speaker doubts whether the verb action actually occurred.
* **rró=**: Optative mood, indicating that the verb action is desired or is a command.
* **íz=**: Conditional mood, indicating that the verb action is the premise of some condition, whether real or hypothetical.
* **it=**: Counterfactual mood, indicating that the verb action is hypothetical and did not actually occur.

## Copula
Adiugoskr has both a null-marked and an overt copula **iused**. **iused** is usually found in main clauses, and less commonly in subordinate clauses unless it is being emphasized or a verb is needed for the clitic to attach to.

### Existential verb
The copula is not the same as the existential verb, [**ajen** *'exist'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#exist). However, like the copula, it also has a null-marked counterpart. **ajen** is usually found in main clauses, and less commonly in subordinate clauses unless it is being emphasized or a verb is needed for the clitic to attach to.

## Agreement with verbal arguments
### Intransitives and reflexives
Intransitive and reflexive verbs in Adiugoskr have only one argument, the subject. These verbs agree with their subject's animacy in tone: 1st and 2nd person arguments (also called *Speech Act Participants*, or *SAPs*) and animate 3rd person subjects cause the final syllable of the verb to have a high tone, as opposed to a low tone for inanimate subjects.

<div class="gloss">
  Rofá ejoná a eljetwar ezjgeniu iuzagá. <br/>
  rofá ejoná a eljet-war ezjgeniu iu=zagá <br/>
  dog*(AN)* lonely\*AN* in station-*POSS* bus *PST*=sleep\*AN*<br/>
  ! 'The lonely dog slept in the bus station.'
</div>

### Transitives with 3rd person subjects and objects
A transitive verb where both the subject and object are 3rd person nouns will have a high tone final syllable if either argument is animate, or low tone if both are inanimate.

### Transitives
If the two core arguments of a transitive, non-reflexive verb involves an SAP, then the verb exhibits polypersonal agreement with its arguments.

* **-yé**: 1st person **subject** > 2nd person **object**
* **-dé**: 1st person **subject** > 3rd person **object**
* **-bó**: 2nd person **subject** > 3rd person **object**

These can be given a rising tone instead of a high tone to invert the subject-object relationship:

* **-yě**: 1st person **object** < 2nd person **subject**
* **-dě**: 1st person **object** < 3rd person **subject**
* **-bǒ**: 2nd person **object** < 3rd person **subject**

## Morphosyntactic alignment
Adiugoskr is a direct-inverse language that organizes verbal arguments according to a hierarchy. The argument that is higher on this hierarchy is the agent of the verb, and the argument that is lower on this hierarchy is the object. This hierarchy is based on an NP's salience to the discourse context, and SAPs are generally more salient than animate 3rd person arguments, which are more generally more salient than inanimate 3rd person arguments.

Arguments can be made more salient (*promoted*) by marking an overt noun argument with the proximate marker **-dé**, or by topicalizing them. While an SAP that has been promoted outranks other SAPs, a promoted 3rd person argument can never outrank any SAP. Thus, the full hierarchy is as follows:

1. Speech Act Participants (SAPs)
    1. Proximate SAPs
    2. Topicalized SAPs
    3. 1st person arguments
    4. 2nd person arguments
2. 3rd person arguments
    1. Proximate 3rd person arguments
    2. Topicalized 3rd person arguments
    3. Animate, human 3rd person arguments
    4. Animate 3rd person arguments
    5. Inanimate 3rd person arguments

### Inverted verbs
A rising tone on the final syllable of a verb indicates that it has been inverted, and that the higher-ranking argument is the object and the lower-raking argument is the agent.

### Inherently inverse verbs
Some verbs are inherently inverse, meaning that for those verbs, animate and promoted 3rd person arguments are outrank SAPs, which in turn outrank non-promoted inanimate arguments. Thus, the following hierarchy applies for inherently inverse verbs:

2. 3rd person arguments
    1. Proximate 3rd person arguments
    2. Topicalized 3rd person arguments
    3. Animate, human 3rd person arguments
    3. Animate 3rd person arguments
1. Speech Act Participants (SAPs)
    1. Proximate SAPs
    2. Topicalized SAPs
    3. 1st person arguments
    4. 2nd person arguments
3. Non-promoted inanimate 3rd person arguments

Most inherently inverse verbs are verbs that are unpleasant or immoral for a person to do, such as [**rrigau** *'murder'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#murder) or [**venba** *'swindle'*](/adiugoskr/dictionary#swindle).
